Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the,
the Center. This time, I'm joined by Doctor Navin
Straus. And we've already had an interview back in
January this year. I'm leaving a link with in
the description of the, of this one. And today
we're talking about her latest book or the latest
edition of her book, defending pornography, free speech, sex
and The Fight For women's rights there. It is
right. So Naveen, welcome back to the show. It's
always a huge pleasure to everyone.
I'm delighted to be back Ricardo. Although I must
say I have very mixed feelings about NYU Press
having reached out to me last year and saying
this old book that I wrote 30 years ago
is still sadly very relevant because of the ongoing
and indeed increasing attacks on sexual expression under this
stigmatizing term pornography or it's sometimes attacked as obscenity.
But these are labels that have been applied to
a whole range of extremely valuable, important expression including
classic literature.
So let me just ask you by the way,
because sometimes people like to have some definitions, but
in the particular case of pornography, do you think
that there is any proper definition of, of it
or that we even need one to address these
more ethical and legal issues surrounding pornography or not.
This is exactly the right place to start Ricardo.
And if I will, if I may, I will
give uh definitions of not only pornography but also
obscenity. Uh, AND let me throw in yet another
really important term and concept here which is child
pornography. So to start with the term pornography itself
has no specific legal meaning or significance at all
in American law. And indeed, to the best of
my knowledge, the law of most other countries, it
is, if you look it up in the dictionary,
it is inevitably defined as expression that is sexually
explicit or sexually suggestive that is intended to or
has the effect of being sexually stimulating or pleasurable.
That said we tend to use it at least
in contemporary American speech as a derogatory term. It
has a rather stigmatizing association, I think. Um, SO
we tend to use it for whatever sexual expression
we find distasteful many years ago. With the, there
was a very strong aspect of the feminist movement
in the United States that uh was trying to
crusade for outlawing what they called pornography because they
wanted to create a new legal concept of sexual
expression that they thought should be censored. It wasn't
restricted under contemporary American law and it still is
not, uh, they defined it as sexual expression that
is demeaning or degrading to women. But to try
to make the point that they were not completely
against all sexual expression. They used the term erotica
uh to refer to sexual expression that they thought
was fine. And one of my colleagues in the
feminist anti censorship movement, because there were many of
us and are many of us who are completely
committed to women's equality and safety who therefore oppose
censoring sexual expression. Uh One of my colleagues uh
quoted one of these um pro censorship feminists who
literally said, what turns me on is erotica. What
turns you on is pornography showing the inevitable subjective
concepts here. Now in American law, the vast majority
of sexual expression, whether it's explicit or whether it's
suggestive, almost all of it is completely protected under
the constitution. After all, the first amendment says Congress
shall make no law abridging the freedom of speech.
It doesn't say unless the speech is about sex.
Um There are however two categories of sexual expression
that the Supreme Court has said are excluded from
first amendment protection. So I think it's really important
for people to understand that. Um THE one that
I think is defensible and not controversial is for
child pornography that has a very specific definition which
turns on not what the expression depicts or describes,
but rather on how it is produced illegal child
pornography, which is not protected by the first amendment
includes a sexually explicit or suggestive depiction of an
actual child, a minor is actually used in the
production process. So that is a form of child
abuse, child exploitation. And therefore, it's no more protected
than in any other form of child abuse or
exploitation. But it is not defined in terms of
what the image is. The Supreme Court made that
absolutely clear in a case in which it struck
down a federal statute that purported to outlaw virtual
child pornography. In other words, an actual adult was
used, but it was a young looking adult or
computer morphing techniques were used to make the adult
look younger and so forth. So the harm that
the Supreme Court is considered concerned about legitimately is
the harm to an actual human being of being
used to produce the material, not whatever harm is
feared to occur from an adult or somebody else
seeing an image that appears to depict a young
person, just one other definition and then we can
move on to the, you know, nonlegal questions. Uh
And that is the concept of obscenity. I'm putting
that in quotes. That is actually a legal term
of art that the Supreme Court um defined first
in 1956. Interestingly enough, until that point, the Supreme
Court had not recognized any category of sexual expression
defined in terms of its content, what it depicted
um as being unprotected by the first amendment. It
did that for the first time in 1956. Um
AND it created this concept of obscenity, which consists
of there's a three part definition. Every sexually explicit
material that somebody contends is obscene has to satisfy
all three criteria. So it's a relatively narrow concept,
but it's still very dangerous because all three of
the elements are inevitably subjective. Um The first element
is that it has to appeal to the prurient
and pr urient, not a very common word, prurient
interest in sex. And the Supreme Court literally defined
that in a subsequent case as a sick or
morbid interest in sex as opposed to a normal
and healthy interest in sex. All that really helps,
right? Uh And it's defined according to contemporary community
standards. Number two, um the material has to be
patently offensive, a patently offensive de depiction or description
of sexual or expiratory organs or activities again defined
in terms of contemporary community standards. And number three,
this one is usually the one that's hardest to
satisfy. I it is defined in terms of national
standards to make it harder to satisfy. The material
has to lack serious literary, artistic, political or scientific
value. I used to tell my con law students,
there's an easy acronym for remembering that the slaps
test no serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value.
And um many, many of works that have been
attacked as illegal obscenity are saved because experts will
testify that they do have some serious value that
said um the obscenity exception lies about as a
proverbial sort of Damocles to chill certain sexual expression
and many Supreme Court justices as well as, um,
to the best of my knowledge, just about every
expert on first amendment law has objected to this
exception saying it is completely inconsistent with the language,
history and purpose of freedom of speech.
So let me ask you here because at a
certain point, you mentioned feminists and I know that
when it comes to pornography and also other sex
related uh topics like even sex work in general,
we have, we have two main camps of feminists.
The ones that I, I I'm going to call
here s pro censorship feminists. And on the other
hand, the anti censorship feminists. So could you please
tell us what are some of the claims made
by the pro censorship feminists against pornography? I mean,
for example, things like that people like Andrea at
work and Catherine mckinnon and others have argued,
they have argued that certain sexual depictions are uh
stimulate discrimination toward women disrespect toward women and therefore
lead to violence against women and discrimination against women.
In fact, their claims go much further and refuse
to distinguish between, let's say a dept of a
rape scene, even in a classic work of art
and actual rape. Now, at the time that that
movement was first became ascendant, which was in the
late 19 seventies, early 19 eighties. And I believe
it reached a height in the 19 nineties. Um
AT that time, those of us who were feminists
and opposed uh censorship of sexual expression understood those
claims as, as the rhetoric that one makes in
making a strong point. We did not take them
literally. And yet, as I explain in the new
preface to the reissued addition of defending pornography, uh
even though this specific effort of the pro censorship,
feminists to outlaw their concept of sexually discriminatory or
degrading pornography that failed, it failed resoundingly in the
courts of law. And I think in the court
of public opinion, including among younger feminists as well
on a larger scale, they have been very successful
because their some of their more general concepts such
as equating expression of violence with actual violence that
has become quite widely accepted in many dominant aspects
of our culture today, including on campus where surveys
that are conducted by fire, the foundation for individual
rights and expression and college pulse and others show
that distressingly high percentages of students and even younger
faculty members consider that expression that is violent is
completely indistinguishable from actual violence. And this is very
disturbing because not only does it lead to calls
to censor I mentioned for example, rape scenes at
Columbia University which has a famous core curriculum studying
Classic works of Western literature. Students objected to reading
the metamorphosis, you know, at Greek Classic because of
depictions of rape. Uh BUT even worse than the
censorial aspect of this false equation between expression and
conduct in terms of violence is that if you
believe that violent words are the same as violent
conduct, then you are justified in responding to violent
words with actual physical violence. And again, these surveys
that are now being regularly conducted on campus show
that distressingly high numbers of students are saying that
they think violence, physical violence is justified as a
response to a speaker whose words they consider to
be violent or to encourage violence.
So, something that the anti porn feminists usually bring
to the table in debates on pornography is that
they many times reference uh scientific literature that they
say supposedly points toward uh pornography being harmful, psychological,
harmful for the viewers in different kinds of ways.
I mean, in my non expert opinion, the studies
I looked at they were not extremely high quality,
but that's besides the point here, do you think
that uh those kinds of arguments should be taken
seriously in the context of uh dealing with pornography
as a form of freedom of expression or
uh yes, not only in the context of pornography
but with respect to every type of expression, Ricardo,
freedom of speech along with other freedoms appropriately is
not absolute of the importance of treating a right
as a constitutional right as a fundamental right is
that it creates a strong presumption in favor of
the right and imposes a strong, a heavy burden
of proof on government to justify any restriction. Uh
And let me just state what that burden of
proof is. And so the question then is, is
there evidence to satisfy it with respect to any
particular type of expression, including pornography or obscenity? Uh,
AND the burden of proof is that the a
speech restriction is justified if, but only if the
government can show that the restriction is necessary to
promote a countervailing goal of compa and that, no,
and I'm gonna use quotes because it's a legal
term of art, no less restrictive alternative would suffice.
So if you could arm without restricting speech or
without restricting as much speech, the government has to
use that less you. In other words, you can
punish speech only as a last resort when it
is literally necessary. So if there were evidence that
restricting some additional sexual expression beyond child, so child
care gray satisfies that standard, I believe uh because
there is evidence that given the secret and clandestine
nature of the production process, um The only method
that works for stifling the production is to outlaw
the resulting product. That was the burden of proof
that the government had to satisfy. Um But when
you talk about the and so if there were
evidence that the only way to prevent rape or
to significantly reduce the number of rapes or to,
you know, reduce the amount of discrimination against women
was to impose further restrictions on sexual expression that
would satisfy me. And more importantly, it would satisfy
the Supreme Court. But the evidence comes nowhere close
to satisfying that bird of proof. I had an
entire chapter in the original book to that point
in which, uh sadly, and ironically, many of the
social scientists who had devoted their whole careers to
trying to see whether there is any connection, especially
between uh violence, actual violence and any kind of
violent depiction, including sexually violent depictions. And they found
no such connection and they complained that their work
was being cited and distorted by advocates of censorship.
In the new preface, I wrote for the new
edition, I updated that research and a social scientist
who continue to study the issue is a very
important issue. Continue to say that there's no evidence
of a causal connection. Um And, and some psychologists
and social psychologists and penologists and criminologists say, you
know, at least for some individuals, it, it actually
deflects them from engaging in actual violent conduct that
this can be a relatively safe outlet for any
kind of violent impulses that they have.
I it's very interesting because I've had on the
show, people who study these forms of, uh let's
say uh these forms of expression on the internet,
particularly, I mean pornography on the internet and how
people consume it and the kinds of supposed psychological
effects that it has on them. And there's even
one very interesting thing that is even if there
was a correlation, uh it would be a negative
correlation because over the years, uh, pornography consumption has
gone up and sexual violence has gone down sexual
assault and other things like that.
And I understand that among young people that, I
mean, I hear a lot of complaints that younger
people are being exposed to por, you know, very
graphic pornography at earlier and earlier ages, um, that
they are having less actual sexual contact in their
real life. Now that may be a negative. And
believe me, I'm not here to advocate for certainly
not for pornography in general or any particular depiction.
But to me, it as is true for all
expression. Some of it is positive, some of it
is negative. I, I would assume the vast majority,
majority of it. The impact depends on myriad countless
other factors including the person who's looking at it
and how they use it and everything else about
them. I mean, when I, in, as I described
in um my book, the most graphic depiction of
a rape that I had ever seen, uh was
in a movie starring Jodie Foster. I'm blanking out
on the name of the movie. Now I wrote
the book in the early nineties. So we're talking
about uh very long ago, but it was a
scene of a gang rape. It was horrible to
watch it. You know, it wasn't completely graphic or
explicit, but it was suggestive enough. And I know
that the reaction that I and many others men
as well as women. People in law enforcement, people
in government had was to mobilize us to crusade
for laws that would more effectively prevent and punish
um people who engage in rape. And that led
among other things to the violence against women act
to train, increase increased training of police officers and
prosecutors and uh others in law enforcement to be
more attuned to and more sensitive about women who
were victims of rape. So, you know, seeing something
depicted, it can lead to exactly the opposite real
world impact in terms of the underlying problems. Now,
you know, for me, I would say as somebody
who is very concerned about young people, I speak
on college campus all the time. Uh I really
am concerned that they develop a positive and enthusiastic
uh attitude towards sex and sexuality and of the
role that I can play in their individual lives
and in their relationships. And so when I hear
complaints that, you know, too much online pornography is
likely to give them unrealistic expectations or turn them
off from actual sensitive real world experiences, you know,
that, that raises a concern in my mind to
which the answer as always is not censoring speech,
but more speech, let's have more positive sexual expressions
that are more constructive.
But since we're talking about sexual expression here, uh
couldn't it happen that particularly the more the people
who fall more on the conservative end of the
political spectrum, conservative feminists and other kinds of conservatives.
If laws that, uh, that would, uh, uh, uh,
if laws that, uh, if laws where there would
be censorship of pornography were to be passed, couldn't
they also target because it's a form of sexual
expression, sexual education in schools and elsewhere.
Absolutely. And, um, we have seen with, uh, various
measures that have either been enacted or proposed that
the targets have because the concepts are so inherently
subjective and the definitions are so vague and overbroad
that any member of the community can make a
complaint about any sexual expression that they find inconsistent
with their values. I, I gave a little legal
lecture at the beginning. Let me add what I
think most of your audience will be familiar with
the most famous statement that a Supreme Court justice
ever made in all of the cases in this
topic was Potter Stewart when he was referring to
illegal obscenity, uh which he referred, he used the
colloquial term, hardcore pornography, which is not a Supreme
Court term, but that many people use. He said
I cannot define it, but I know it when
I see it and the point is that everybody
sees a different it and we certainly have had
experiences of classic works of sexual education. Indeed, from
a feminist point of view, there was a classic
uh at the time that I was writing my
book called Our Bodies Ourselves that was written by
the Boston Women's health collective, you know, a se
positive feminist, positive uh book about women's sexuality and,
and health in general reproductive options. And that was
targeted all over the country as being illegal obscenity.
You know, at the other end of the spectrum
uh work that would be of great concern to
cultural, political and religious conservatives. The Bible has been
attacked and even sought to be removed from public
libraries because of um graphic descriptions of rape and
violence including gang rape against women. So, you know,
nothing in the realm of sexuality or even perceived
sexuality is safe. And I say even perceived sexuality,
Ricardo, because in my book, I give examples of
abstract works of art that people would look at
both conservatives and radical feminists and say, oh, you
know, that's sexually suggestive that clearly is indicative of
violence against women are as clearly inconsistent with traditional
family values. You know, I'm smiling, but it's really
it it it's not, it's really no laughing matter
because it led to has led to uh removals
of of, of uh abstract works of art, even
from college campuses.
And by the way, talking about art and even
other areas where we can have sexual expression. This
could also target, I mean this this kind of
laws and this kind of attitudes toward to pornography
could also target LGBT Q people, right?
And not only could but um have always been
a major target. Not surprisingly because as with any
censorship law that gives basically, uh, unfettered discretion to
the un enforcing authorities precisely because of the vagueness
and the overbreadth of the concept. I mean, I
know it when I see it, that means whoever
is enforcing the law who is probably gonna reflect
not only his own individual values, but those of
doubt, prominent, powerful community interests, whatever they consider distasteful
is going to be suppressed. So, in defending pornography,
uh, again, 30 years ago, I had an enormous
amount of coverage about uh how often and predictably
the targets were LGBT Q expression. And I think
the most dramatic case study on point was our
neighboring country of Canada, which in 1992 did adopt
the feminist pro censorship concept of illegal pornography. Anything
that is demeaning or degrading. And sadly, the predictions
that the anti censorship feminists had made that the
first targets would include feminist and LGBT Q expression.
Sadly, uh that came to roost and all of
the lesbian and gay bookstores in Canada at the
time were immediately targeted. Uh Many of them went
out of business at the US Canada border, Canadian
customs seized all manner of classic works uh by
or about the LGBT Q community. And the real
irony that, you know, again, I she hadn't come
to pass but Andrea Din's own works were suppressed
by Canadians. And I'm talking about not only her
explicitly anti pornography work. So in some way you
would expect because along with other anti pornography crusaders
she depicted and described in great detail exactly the
pornography that she thought was dangerous. But she also
wrote novels. II, I put it in the past
just because sadly, she died a while back. But
her novels com works completely from the imagination were
filled with the most brutal graphic sexual violence. So,
uh, under the explicit terms of the law, she
had advocated her own books were, were censored and
she said, well, I think that's a price worth
paying. Uh MANY of her readers did not agree
with that,
right? And then another to think that anti porn
feminists usually do when arguing against pornography is that
they use terms like sexual exploitation, sexual subordination. What
does that mean? Exactly.
So uh before I answer that excellent question, I
want to say one other point in response to
the prior excellent question because I, I answered in
terms of history. But I wanna make very clear
the reason why NYU press reached out to me
and asked to republish the book as part of
its NYU Classic series and asked me to write
a new preface explaining why. Sadly, it continues to
be completely applicable is that there is an anti
pornography, anti obscenity movement today. Many of, of the
most dominant, powerful strains of which are continuing to
focus on LGBT Q expression. Most important case in
point are a whole raft of state laws, uh
executive orders and local regulations that are attacking library
books in public schools and in public library um
that are said to be pornographic or obscene and
studies have been done. Reports have been done over
the last few years by respected organizations. Um The
American Library Association, Pen America, an organization of writers
that focuses on anti censorship issues. The national coalition
against censorship, the major targets of all of these
efforts throughout the country are books that are by
or about LGBT Q individuals. So this is a
very, very serious ongoing issue. Now to your um
most recent excellent question, um sexual exploitation or sexual
subordination. That again is a very subjective concept. Uh
OBVIOUSLY, in, you know, abstract legal terms, I should
say it's obvious, but maybe it doesn't go without
saying any form of non consensual treatment of a
particular individual is absolutely antithetical to that person's freedom
and dignity and autonomy and is a violation of
criminal law as well as seminal as well as
civil law, which is exactly why we have the
concept of child pornography. Because below a certain age,
our legal system appropriately says you are inherently incapable
of meaningful consent. Um The pro censorship, feminists expressed
equated women with Children and said that because of
um our, the sexist society, the patriarchy in which
we live, they contended that women are inherently incapable
of meaningful consent either to look at sexual expression,
to perform in it uh so forth. And therefore,
they said women should be protected along with Children.
Those of us who think that we might want
to look at uh sexual expression or even perform
for it or even to enjoy sex in general
because this is a movement that was profoundly anti
sex uh in general. Um EVEN beyond commercial, the
commercial pornography and industry um basically saying that inherently
women are exploited and those of us who think
we are consenting are victims of false consciousness. So
that's where the concept of exploitation goes way too
far from my perspective as um what I would
call a classical liberal feminist. And I am concerned
that conditions of inequality and discrimination mean that we
do have to be, be very sure uh to
ascertain that there actually is informed and meaningful voluntary
consent um that women are not victims of even
more subtle forms of exploitation or coercion. Uh You
know, so I am very attentive to that, but
I will not take the final step that the
pro censorship group does. That says sex or sexual
expression is inherently exploitative of women. You know, in
my uh book, I thought one of the most
interesting examples to me uh of even uh what
I would consider to be degrading images uh namely
of uh rape scenes, Nancy Friday, a wonderful feminist
writer collected several volumes of women's fantasies about sexuality.
And uh she found to her surprise that one
of the most common forms of fantasy that women
voluntarily had you know, like when they're daydreaming or
their dreams at night was rape fantasies. And as
she explained, that did not mean that they wanted
to be raped, but they fantasized in a culture
where good girls were brought up, not be so,
you know, to make sexual advances or to seek
pleasure in sex. You know, and Nancy is about
my age. So we were brought up in that
era that to get have permission to enjoy sex,
you had to be overtaken overcome by the male.
And I think we see that uh in the
covers of romance novels, I must admit, I don't
really delve behind the cover, but I see them
in grocery stores and I know that they are
really best selling works. You know, it often depicts
uh you know, this powerful man who is overtaking
a woman. And so that gives her permission to
enjoy the sexuality. So it's all very complex and
um I would reject the broad brush concept that
uh uh of exploitation.
So I'm not sure what uh what your thoughts
on the point I'm about to make uh would
be. But I, it seems to me that uh
we have this sort of very emotional and even
sometimes perhaps moral reactions to pornography. And they come
from women that are perhaps a little bit more
conservative and even men of course, but women that
are more conservative and I, and it's mainly because
they can't imagine themselves being a porn performer doing
those kinds of things that the porn performers do
on set and elsewhere. And that's why they are
against it. And sometimes they uh they would like
to prohibit it. I mean, don't you have this
kind of feeling that this is perhaps what it
all boils down to?
Well, uh Ricardo, but I actually have spent at
least as much time debating against and lobbying against
those from the left end of the political spectrum
as well as the right end of the political
spectrum. So, and even so in the starting in
the late seventies, we had this so called radical
feminists who were the including Andrew D work and
Catherine mckinnon, who were the ones that came up
with this supposedly new fangled concept of illegal pornography.
They were definitely to the left. And today we
still have people who now people on the left
tend to use the term progressive instead of radical.
But again, to distinguish it from those of us
who are liberal and espouse classical liberal values of
free speech and reducing government power. Um We have
progressive feminists who are very concerned about what they
call revenge pornography and uh other are supporting other
kinds of restrictions on sexual expression, including age verification
requirements that's coming from the left as well as
from the right. Um And again, the concerns on
the, so even though we have these opposite perspectives
in terms of general feminist values and family values
very, very different goals. They do coalesce in agreeing
that sexual expression is dangerous. I think that the
danger that is seen from the left continues to
be undermining women's safety and dignity and equality because
somehow they, they reject the idea from their perspective
that a true feminist could really agree to make
her living in the porn industry or even to
look at a porn film. Uh Whereas from the
right, you know, again, they, they, they don't think
that a good woman with traditional family values, you
know, who believes that sex is only appropriate in
the traditional uh for the purpose of having Children
and so forth. Um Those are, but they, they
call less around wanting to restrict individual freedom of
choice and also to project certain values into, into
sexuality. Uh And I, and I must say I
probably had some of those stereotypes myself. I was,
um I assumed that you would not become a
sex worker unless you had absolutely no other options
in life. And um all of us and I
was quite interested through my work in supporting freedom
of choice and meaningful choice, which means and make
sure there are safe working conditions and, uh you
know, no actual physical or even psychological exploitation. So
I met women who were active in, among sex
workers organizing for unions, organizing for workplace protection, you
know, joyously affirming that they could make their living
in other ways. But they had a great deal
of, of satisfaction from doing this. I uh was
quite close with Candida Ra who sadly died a
few a year or two ago, uh who had
been a star performer in conventional pornography was a
feminist and formed her own production company to produce
pornographic films that she thought had a specifically pro
feminist, pro women um sensibility and she very talented
person who could have made her living in many
other ways. You really got a lot of artistic
and, you know, social satisfaction knowing that this was
so important and meaningful to a large audience.
Uh, BUT I mean, perhaps another aspect to the
point I tried to make previously is that when
it comes to these kinds of ideas, like the
one you mentioned, where people assume that no one
would go into pornography or any kind of sex
work unless they were coerced into it or didn't
have any other economic options or, or work options
or, or something like that, uh, that, and the
fact that, uh, the anti porn feminists tend to
assume what goes on in the minds of the
performers because they assume that it's impossible for someone
to really actually like doing that kind of stuff.
Is, isn't that a bit condescending?
Oh, absolutely. I mean, it's very, um, and I
used the term like, uh, big sister, right? That
we know better than you, what is good for
you and if you think that you want to
do this. You are a victim of false consciousness.
So it's a, it may very well be from
a positive benign motive. I'm very happy to give
them the benefit of the doubt that they really
think it is for women's own good to be
protected against um this material. But that kind of
paternalism or maternal is deeply inconsistent with my concept
of uh not only individual rights but also equality.
And in fact, that was the rationale that was
used for all kinds of laws that we now
look back on and say we're deeply discriminatory. Uh
WOMEN were protected by laws that um shielded them
from entering certain professions or even shielded them from
jury duty or that imposed a maximum number of
hours that women could work and so forth. And
in the very first Supreme Court opinion back in
the early seventies that rejected that rationale justice, William
Brennan had a wonderful line which I learned actually,
he lifted from a brief written by Ruth Bader
Ginsburg in her then capacity as the founding director
of the AC Lu Women's Rights Project. Uh WHEN
he said these laws and I would say including
the feminist pro censorship advocated laws uh reflect an
attitude of romantic paternalism which put women. And it
was much more eloquent than my paraphrase, uh which
rather than protecting women, put them in a cage.
And by the way, sort of related to my
previous question, can censorship also harm in different kinds
of way, even the porn performers themselves.
Oh, absolutely. I mean, I need to take a
drink but I wanna make sure you and your
audience see my favorite mug here.
It's very nice.
Thank you. Um, ABSOLUTELY. Because as is true of
every prohibitionist strategy laws restricting the sex industry and
the pornography industry, uh, do not eliminate it altogether.
Rather, they simply force it to go underground, which
means that those who participate in it are subject
to exploitation and abuse that they would not be
if it were a legal activity and they could
be protected by unions by OSHA, the occupational safety
and health administration by health laws and, and so
forth. And that's exactly why sex workers have been
so strongly advocating for legalization and um to the
best of my uh amnesty International and perhaps some
other international human rights organizations have advocated decriminalization of
sex work. Uh NOT so much on free speech
grounds that you and I are talking about, but
on the other grounds that you just raised, you
know, the equality and dignity and safety uh uh
of the people who are participating in it.
Uh That's a very interesting point because wouldn't it
also apply to some of sometimes when feminists raise
the issue of sex trafficking in pornography and other
and also other kinds of sex work. I mean,
wouldn't the legalization or the decriminalization of pornography and
other kinds of sex work? Also, we help fight
against the trafficking.
Yes, absolutely. And um one of the most recent
controversies about this was, and it's a really good
example of both the right and the left ganging
up on sexual expression uh was a law that
was passed a few years ago. The acronyms were
foster and sesta just slightly different versions and uh
the two Houses of Congress, but it was to
uh supposedly to fight online sex trafficking, The federal
online Trafficking Act uh to restrict sexual expression online,
that was advocated by politicians all across the ideological
spectrum and opposed by sex workers organizations and also
opposed by anti trafficking organizations, opposed by LGBT Q
organizations and so forth because they said, you know,
if you, you eliminate these online forums, then that
we're going to be forced to go back on
the street, which is much more dangerous where uh
trafficking actually does occur. And a number of studies
have been done now about the actual impact of
that law that was supposed to protect against trafficking
has, in fact, um the studies consistently show led
to increased trafficking.
I mean, at this debate between the anti porn
feminists and the let's call them pro porn feminists.
Don't you think that it would be easier for
people to uh uh uh I mean, for people
to come to a sort of, I, I wouldn't
even say consensus but to agree more with each
other if they just ask reps, pardon? The performers
themselves, how they feel about their work because it,
it seems to me that, of course, it's true
that there are a few people there, women and
men that probably do not like it that much.
And so, uh, and, uh, a number of them
are victims of sex trafficking, of co, of course,
but it seems to me that there's still a
big number of performers that, uh, went into porn
from, from their own volition. I mean, it was
their own decision, not worse and they like what
they do, right? So, I mean, couldn't, couldn't this
be solved with uh by talking more with those
people, the people who actually do that kind of
work
from my perspective and from your perspective, that would
be effective because we respect individual, freedom of choice.
But from the perspective of those who think that
they are protecting people and that they know better
than the people themselves, what is good for them?
That's not a solution, right? It goes back to
your earlier question about paternalism or maternal. Uh But
Ricardo, I do want to um uh take issue
with one term that you used, which is uh
uh it pro porn feminist. And it's a little
bit similar to, you know, I don't know anybody
who's pro abortion. I just know people who are
pro choice. Uh And so I am provid freedom
of choice. I'm not advocating any particular expression at
all. And that's, I say that not only about
pornography but about hate speech, about extremist speech, about
disinformation, any other form of controversial expression? I'm not
endorsing the content. I'm not dis endorsing it. I'm
just addressing a different principle which is, it doesn't
matter what my own view is, that's up to
the individual to decide what, to produce, what to
consume, what not to produce what not to consume.
By the way, the feminists who are against pornography,
do they also target the websites for content creation
that the content creation that is done by the
performers themselves? Like only fans and other kinds of
platforms? Do they also? Sorry?
Oh, I'm so sorry. I I can't address that
specific example. But if I look at the uh
anti porn laws that were drafted by uh the
pertinent group of feminists and that are advocated by
them or foster and sesta uh which were advocated
by them. It's absolutely irrelevant who is involved in
the creation or the consumption for that matter. Uh
They look simply at the content and the value
judgment they make about whether other people should be
making that content or enjoying that content.
Uh Yes. The only reason why I mentioned that
is because uh many, many of those feminists tend
to argue that because uh uh tend to argue
that women who are performers are exploited by the
producers, the directors and other people in the industry.
But I mean, at least in the specific case
of online content creators. That is the, the pe
uh the performers themselves creating their own content that
would be even less relevant.
You know, it's so interesting because I have read
that there are just enormous numbers of people, men,
as well as women who are, you know, engaging
in their own productions. You know, they film themselves
and they put it online and they don't even
get paid for it obviously get, you know, and
nobody's putting a gun to their head. They obviously
get a great deal of uh of pleasure from
that. In fact, uh I do a lot of
work on campuses as you know, because uh campuses
have been such an important center of the debates
about free speech and censorship. And one of the
uh recent issues on campus you may be aware
of is a provost at a university in Wisconsin
who he and his wife voluntarily. It wasn't even
pornography as, as I recall, they were just um
naked uh videos of themselves cooking, right? And they
got an enormous amount of pleasure from it. Um
But he has now lost his job because that
was seen as being so controversial. And those of
us in the free speech community say, you know,
he had a right to do it and nobody
made any complaints about anything he said or did
in his official profe professorial or administrative capacities. But
there is such negative judgment about even nakedness, let
alone um sexual content. And I think some of
that goes back to a puritanical heritage that we
have in this country. Um Many European countries and
other, you know, western advanced democracies are much more
tolerant of sexual expression than we are the united
on the whole has the strongest protection of free
speech. Certainly that's true for speech in the public
policy realm, more protection for defamation about public officials,
more protection for hate speech, more protection for extremist
speech. Uh But my friends in other countries are
mocking me about our censoriousness when it comes to
sexuality or the human body.
Yeah, I live in here in Europe and I
can confirm that. So. Uh OK, so I think
that this would be a great point for us
to wrap up the interview one. And again, the
book is defending pornography, free speech, sex and the
Fight for women's rights. There, it is again, uh
nothing apart from the book. Would you just like
to tell people again where they can find you
and your work on the internet?
I eschew social media. But I do have a
uh profile at the New York law school website
uh where you can find uh a lot of
materials including footnotes for my recent books and several
and a whole list of all of my other
publications and I do answer emails and my email
address is also on that website.
Great. So thank you so much again for coming
on. The show. It's always a big pleasure to
talk with you and I think this was a
very informative and fun conversation. So, thank you so
much.
Thank you so much, Ricardo. I look forward to
another opportunity.
Hi guys. Thank you for watching this interview. Until
the end. If you liked it, please share it.
Leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by N Lights Learning
and development. Then differently check the website at N
lights.com and also please consider supporting the show on
Patreon or paypal. I would also like to give
a huge thank you to my main patrons and
paypal supporters, Perera Larson, Jerry Muller and Frederick Suno
Bernard Seche O of Alex Adam Castle Matthew Whitting
B no wolf, Tim Ho Erica LJ Connors, Philip
Forrest Connelly. Then the Met Robert Wine in NAI
Z Mark Nevs called Holbrook Field, Governor Mikel Stormer
Samuel Andre Francis for Agns Ferger Ken Herz J
and Lain Jung Y and the K Hes Mark
Smith J Tom Hummel S friends David W de
Ro Ro Diego and Jan Punter Romani Charlotte Bli
Nicole Barba, Adam Hunt, Pavlo Stassi, Nale Me, Gary
G Alman Samos, Ari and YPJ Barboza Julian Price
Edward Hall, Eden Broner Douglas Fry Franca Lati Gilon
Cortez or Solis Scott Zachary Ftw Daniel Friedman, William
Buckner, Paul Giorgino, Luke Loki, Georgio, Theophanous Chris Williams
and Peter Wo David Williams Di Costa Anton, Erickson,
Charles Murray, Alex Chao Marie. Martinez, Coralie Chevalier, Bangalore
Larry Dey Junior, Old Einon Starry Michael Bailey. Then
Spur by Robert Grassy Zorn. Jeff mcmahon, Jake Zul
Barnabas Radis Mark Kemple Thomas Dvor, Luke Neeson, Chris
to Kimberley Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert Jessica. No, Linda Brendan
Nicholas Carlson, Ismael Bensley Man, George Katis Valentine Steinman,
Perlis Kate Von Goler, Alexander Albert Liam Dan Biar
Masoud Ali Mohammadi Perpendicular Jer Urla. Good enough Gregory
Hastings David Pins of Sean Nelson, Mike Levin and
Jos Net. A special thanks to my producers is
our web, Jim Frank Luca, Toni, Tom Vig and
Bernard N Cortes Dixon, Bendik, Muller Thomas Trumble, Catherine
and Patrick Tobin, John Carlman, Negro, Nick Ortiz and
Nick Golden. And to my executive producers, Matthew Lavender,
Si Adrian Bogdan Knits and Rosie. Thank you for
all.